Particle balance constraint updated (#4395)
ukaea/PROCESS: documentation/source/physics-models/plasma_fuelling.md

# Plasma Fuelling | `PlasmaFuelling()`

## Particle balance

The control of fuelling is governed by 4 key particle flux equations for each of the primary fuel species and the helium ash, $\alpha$.

$$
\frac{dn_{\text{T}}}{dt} = f_{\text{fuelling,T}}\eta_{\text{fuelling}}\Gamma_{\text{fuel}} + \Gamma_{\text{D+D} \rightarrow \text{T}} - \Gamma_{\text{D+T}} - \frac{N_{\text{T}}}{\tau_{\text{T}}^*}
$$

$$
\frac{dn_{\text{D}}}{dt} = f_{\text{fuelling,D}}\eta_{\text{fuelling}}\Gamma_{\text{fuel}} -2 \Gamma_{\text{D+D}}- \Gamma_{\text{D+3He}} - \Gamma_{\text{D+T}} - \frac{N_{\text{T}}}{\tau_{\text{D}}^*}
$$

$$
\frac{dn_{\text{3He}}}{dt} = f_{\text{fuelling,3He}}\eta_{\text{fuelling}}\Gamma_{\text{fuel}} + \Gamma_{\text{D+D} \rightarrow \text{3He}} - \frac{N_{\text{T}}}{\tau_{\text{3He}}^*}
$$

$$
\frac{dn_{\alpha}}{dt} = \Gamma_{\text{D+3He}} + \Gamma_{\text{D+T}} - \frac{N_{\alpha}}{\tau_{\alpha}^*}
$$

In a steady state equilibrium all 4 of these equations should balance, therefore:

$$
\frac{dn_{\text{D}}}{dt} = \frac{dn_{\text{T}}}{dt} = \frac{dn_{\text{3He}}}{dt} = \frac{dn_{\alpha}}{dt} = 0
$$

> Here $\eta_{\text{fuelling}}$ is the fuelling efficiecny which represents the method of injecting fuel into the plasma. Gas puffing on the low field side is probably around 0.01-0.1, supersonic gas is 0.1 and 0.2 and using pellets can get you close to unity with 0.5-0.9. $\Gamma_{\text{fuelling}}$ is the fuel injection rate into the vacuum vessel, so $\eta_{\text{fuelling}} \Gamma_{\text{fuelling}}$ together presents the fraction of injected fuel that actually makes it into the plasma core to fuse. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here, $\eta_{\text{fuelling}}$ is the fuelling efficiency, which quantifies how effectively fuel injected into the vacuum vessel reaches the plasma core. The value of $\eta_{\text{fuelling}}$ depends on the fuelling method. Typical values are around 0.01--0.1 for low-field-side gas puffing, 0.1--0.2 for supersonic gas injection, and 0.5--0.9 for pellet injection, which can approach unity under favourable conditions. $\Gamma_{\text{fuelling}}$ is the fuel injection rate into the vacuum vessel. The product $\eta_{\text{fuelling}} \Gamma_{\text{fuelling}}$ therefore represents the effective fuelling rate, i.e. the fraction of the injected fuel that successfully penetrates into the plasma and becomes available for fusion reactions.
```

Reviewer: Suggestion to tidy up this section a bit.

!!! note "Quantifying $R$"

    The recycling coefficient $R$, defined as the fraction of particles crossing the LCFS that return to the plasma, can depend on numerous factors—including vessel pumping speed, neutral pressure in the private‑divertor region, impurity seeding levels, and the detailed properties of the SOL. Among these parameters, $R$ is the least certain and the most difficult to quantify. In next‑step devices, the SOL temperature is expected to be high, so particles reflected from the vessel walls are mostly ionized within the SOL and are removed by pumping before they can effectively refuel the burning plasma. As a result, the recycling coefficient is anticipated to be lower than in present‑day tokamaks, where $R$ can often approach unity. An additional uncertainty is the extent of neutral penetration at the plasma edge, which influences both the pedestal density and the density profile, and therefore also affects $R$[^1].

### METIS Alpha Confinement

$$
\tau_{\alpha} = f_{\alpha}\tau_{\text{E}}\frac{R}{1-R}\tau_{\text{ne}}
$$

> This is the model currently in METIS[^2] and is found in [^3]

Reviewer 2: But this isn't used in Process?

--------------

> ### Tritium Flow Rate | `calculate_plasma_tritium_flow_rate()`

Reviewer 2: Not sure about "flow rate": it's the density derivative in the plasma.

Author: I left it as flow rate as the functions returns the net particle flow in the plasma, so not necessarily the density

$$
\frac{dn_{\text{T}}}{dt} = f_{\text{fuelling,T}}\eta_{\text{fuelling}}\Gamma_{\text{fuel}} + \Gamma_{\text{D+D} \rightarrow \text{T}} - \Gamma_{\text{D+T}} - \frac{N_{\text{T}}}{\tau_{\text{T}}^*}
$$

---------------

### Deuterium Flow Rate | `calculate_plasma_deuterium_flow_rate()`

$$
\frac{dn_{\text{D}}}{dt} = f_{\text{fuelling,D}}\eta_{\text{fuelling}}\Gamma_{\text{fuel}} -2 \Gamma_{\text{D+D}}- \Gamma_{\text{D+3He}} - \Gamma_{\text{D+T}} - \frac{N_{\text{T}}}{\tau_{\text{D}}^*}
$$

---------------

### Helium-3 Flow Rate | `calculate_plasma_helium3_flow_rate()`

$$
\frac{dn_{\text{3He}}}{dt} = f_{\text{fuelling,3He}}\eta_{\text{fuelling}}\Gamma_{\text{fuel}} + \Gamma_{\text{D+D} \rightarrow \text{3He}} - \frac{N_{\text{T}}}{\tau_{\text{3He}}^*}
$$

---------------

### Alpha Particle Flow Rate | `calculate_plasma_alphas_flow_rate()`

$$
\frac{dn_{\alpha}}{dt} = \Gamma_{\text{D+3He}} + \Gamma_{\text{D+T}} - \frac{N_{\alpha}}{\tau_{\alpha}^*}
$$

-----------------

## Fuel Burnup Fration

In a steady state tokamak, the burnup fraction ($f_b$) is explicitly defined by the following rate equation:

$$
f_b = \frac{\Gamma_{\text{fusion}}}{\Gamma_{\text{fuel}}}
$$

> where $\Gamma_{\text{fusion}}$ is the fusion rate in reactions per second $[\text{s}^{-1}]$, and $\Gamma_{\text{fuel}}$ is our fuelling rate into the vessel like is shown above also in $[\text{s}^{-1}]$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where $\Gamma_{\text{fusion}}$ is the fusion reaction rate per second $[\text{s}^{-1}]$, and $\Gamma_{\text{fuel}}$ is the fuel injection rate into the vacuum vessel in particles per second $[\text{s}^{-1}]$.
```

**It is recommended to have this constraint on as it is a plasma consistency model**

----------------

### Helium-3 Flow Consistency

This constraint can be activated by stating `icc = 95` in the input file.

This constraint ensures that the change in helium-3 particles as a function of time is zero. It ensures the output of `calculate_plasma_helium3_flow_rate()` is zero

**It is recommended to have this constraint on as it is a plasma consistency model**

----------------

### Alpha Particle Flow Consistency

This constraint can be activated by stating `icc = 96` in the input file.

This constraint ensures that the change in alpha particles as a function of time is zero. It ensures the output of `calculate_plasma_alphas_flow_rate(()` is zero

**It is recommended to have this constraint on as it is a plasma consistency model**

------------------

### Fuelling Proportion Consistency

This constraint can be activated by stating `icc = 97` in the input file.

This ensures that all 3 injected fuelling fractions sum up to 1:

$$
f_{\text{fuelling,D}} + f_{\text{fuelling,T}} + f_{\text{fuelling,3He}} = 1.0
$$

> **It is recommended to have this constraint on as it is a plasma consistency model**

Reviewer 2: I think you need to be more explicit about the system of equations (i.e. all of the above constraints) and the solution parameters (i.e. optimisation parameters) used to solve them. What's should the user do to enforce all of these constraints in their optimisation problem?

Reviewer 2: Snippet of constraints and opt params required to enable this please.
